you with? Well, almost anything. Many of them had
their own big paddles, like a baseball bat that
they smoothed off. We were supposed to get them to
sign a paddle in Christmas. So I took a board about
so long and made it in the shape of a fish and got them
to sign it. And a lot of them thought that was the
paddle I was supposed to be paddling with, and it
wasn't. So they gave the wrong impression that I
was getting a small paddle. So we got that
straightened out. But I did keep that fish paddle
signed for a long time. And then it disappeared. As
you move around, you can do these
things. What else have we left out that We left any
people out? Well, let me think now. Who are some
people, you mentioned Mr. Hensel, who are some
other people for whom you feel gratitude for your
A&M years? My A&M years, of course. Your student
years. Student years. All right. Charles Ratoon
Brooks in architecture I like very much. He's the
only one that didn't treat me like a foreigner over
there. We were taking architecture courses as
landscape art students, and a lot of them didn't
think we had to mention being over there. But he
didn't. And he was such a wonderful teacher that I
took everything he had, every course he had, in
history of architecture. And then we had a senior
inspection trip. in the class of 37-38, I was in
class 37. We went on a bus trip to Natchez in New
Orleans, and Mr. Brooks went along with us to
lecture us on architecture. And we didn't have
enough money to pay for the bus, so two ladies from
Hearn went with Oh, my. And we had quite a time. But
we got to Natchez, and I'm telling you now, we went
to the first Confederate ball at Natchez,
Mississippi. And Mrs. Grace Grafton Miller,
that's that thing that I went to. And so we went to
the first Confederate ball I had, and somebody
decided that at the Grand March, these boys in
uniforms should be in it. So I went. So you Aggies
were part of the?
Confederate Ball Grand March in Natchez,
Mississippi for the Natchez Pilgrimage. And I
remember that we were riding quad trains on the bus
for entertainment. Brooks wrote one. It was
raining when we left. He says, I thought we were
rather dippy, starting from Mississippi, with
the weather so drippy. But after Natchez and the
romance of Natchez, there's nothing that matches
Natchez. Weepy. So years later, I'm at a National
Council of Garden Clubs meeting in Biloxi, and I go
up to, this lady's there, the receiver of the ward,
so I went up there to talk to her, and I says, I said,
do you remember that bunch of cadets? And I
remember that little poem, I said, we wrote some
quatrains, and here's one of them. So I wrote, I
recited that poem that I won at, and she says, I want
you to write that down. She said, if you'll let us
come back to Natchez any time, I'll put you up in the
big house. I'd have to get back in the big house, but
you'd have to climb a ladder to get in the bed in that
thing. But they got us a date with one of those bell,
those skirts, and we got to see the inside of a
house, and one of us, They have the living quarters
and the show quarters. And that was quite an
experience.
I had some rather interesting experiences along
the line, but they've all been fun. Let's see. I see
in my notes I didn't ask about Bonfire. What was
Bonfire like when you were an undergraduate? I was
trash on the drill field, on the present drill
field. And where did y'all gather that trash? All
over the county. People would come down the next
morning and pick out what they thought was there
and take it back home. And if they didn't get it back
the next night, just a pile of trash is all right.
Now, I've understood that there's usually a
privy, an outhouse. uh... whose job was it to grab
the outhouse and
and that would not be donated willing that would
have been acquired uh...
what else if we left out of your student days
still i had more from the freshman Just because I
wanted to. I wasn't afraid of the sophomores. I
didn't know they were piss-heads, as we called
them. And I wasn't afraid of them. And I didn't
care. I wasn't afraid of them, but I didn't flaunt
it in their face. I made them learn everything they
got out of me. But it's all fun. If you take all that
in fun, it's great. And I had tried to be a good
freshman, and apparently I was, because I got to be
a corporal my sophomore year. And didn't
everybody make corporal? I was glad to be a squad
leader, and that was part of the thing. But anyway,
I think I had more fun as a freshman at A&M than any
freshman ever had. You see, I lived in a room over
there. But I was supposed to put a note on my door if I
went to the library or wherever I went. And you're
supposed to get somebody to sign that. So finally
they said, well, you just sign it and go on. So I did.
So I went anywhere I wanted. I went all over that
campus. And finally, some people came over. Some
upper class people came over to study with me.
Thought I was going to make a... Good grade. Never
will forget Dr. Humber as long as I live. In
genetics. I was taking genetics for the last term
of my sophomore year. And we were going to have a
first big quiz. And for some reason, he decided
he'd read out people who had an A in the course. And
he read my name out. I had the exam. He handed my
paper back to me and said, you better get busy. I'd
gotten mixed up on the first question, and instead
of leaving it going on, I just stayed with it. I made
35 on the first one. So I worked all... I just worked
like the devil the rest of the years to get that down
to a C. And I finally got it to a C. Boy, what a... And
we had to count fruit flies up on top of the whole...
Well, the animal science building, the animal
urban building, that was across the quadrangle
from ag engineering. We counted fruit flies until
I thought we'd go crazy. But anyway, that was part
of the genetics. Genetics was a good course, but I
sure didn't flub on it. I made it through, but I
thought it was one of the hardest courses I had.
Next to soil. Soil was a good course. It was a hard
course. Dr. Jones, he's a good teacher.
OK, the last question for this morning session. As
you look back, what did it mean to your life that you
attended Texas A&M? Everything. Once an Aggie,
always an Aggie. And of course, I discovered
things there I'd never seen or heard of in my life.
When you grow up with that many women, You're glad
to get away.
For the first time in my life, I was with a man that I
respected and loved and enjoyed being with.
I just thought that first year was just wonderful.
Let's start again. Bob, would you summarize in a
comparatively short time, your experience
between 1940 and when you come back to A&M in 68.
Yes, it was in Oklahoma under one president. Well,
but you went away to the war, had a distinguished
war record. Under distinguished. I got shot out a
few times. I got wounded three times, lost the leg
and sent home. stepped on a mine 1.30 one morning,
blew it off, laid there 27 hours before they picked
me up, and rolled me off as killed in action. But
then I didn't get killed. Well, then I see. You
worked at Baylor. Well, I went to work at Baylor.
First in Baylor was a godsend. I didn't know
whether I could work a day or an hour They didn't
care. They wanted somebody to fix that campus with
Centennial and persuaded Patton Neff to hire me.
And there was nothing between Waco Hall and Patton
Neff Hall except a sea of mud and two walks. So I
worked out the plan like I told you. He said, build
them, Rocker, build them. I didn't have anybody to
count them. Anyway, that worked out. We put the
grass back, and they hadn't had grass before. Then
Baylor, Oklahoma, wanted me to come there. And I
told them I'd be glad to come, but I couldn't come
until June the 1st, because I'd promised Baylor
I'd stay there until the centennial started. And
they said, we'll wait. So they did. And that was 20
very wonderful, happy, professional years. Our
kids were all raised there. Dr. and Ms. Cross were
just the wonderful people to work for. I
think I told you about the trees. I
mentioned later that I had a project with the
garden clubs to plant a million trees a year in the
51 organizations they had. And they would make a
million trees. What am I saying? Two million
trees. A million trees. When they planted, they
got busy and planted 108 million. They really did a
job on trees. But we had people planting trees that
had never seen or heard of how to plant a tree. And a
lot of them discovered new terms in trees. It was
good. Now let's see, what did you... Excuse me.
How did you... come to A&M. Who made the contact?
Tom Cherry came up to see me. He came up to see the
high-rise dorms on the campus and discovered what
we called a small test garden. And Earl Rudder had
told, no, the board had told Earl Rudder they
wanted flowers back on the campus and he could find
them and they'd hire him. So Ms. Rudder put my name
in the pot after we went to All right, how did you and
Mrs. Rudder, how were you acquainted? I was
president of the Southwest Chapter of the
American Society of Landscape Architects, and we
had invited Ms. Lady Bird Johnson down to receive a
citation. She couldn't come to get it, so Mrs.
Rudder was going to receive it for her. And we sat by
each other all night. She went back home and said,
Earl, I found you a man. And to make it brief, they
hired me. She put my name in the box. All right, I'm
not going to ask about salary any other time. What
was your beginning salary at A&M then? Oh, that's
why I want to know, $20,000.
And that's 1968. 68. See, I had just done the World
Fan Project in New York for the governor of
Oklahoma, and it turned out all right. And... But
they called me, and I went down for an interview.
I mean, Morris Bloodworth called me to come down.
And anyway, to make a long story short, they
offered me $20,000, and I talked to Mr. Rutter, I
mean, Dr. Cross, and Dr. Cross said, Don't look
back. Says, I'm resigning. He says, July the 1st.
And the man they hired has never been in education.
He says, whoa, we don't know what you're going to
do. And Mrs. Cross, I had never seen her anyway, but
dressed ready to go out on the street. This woman,
this is when I showed up in negligee. I never saw
anything but a negligee and barefooted. And that
was not the image of a college friend's wife. And I
knew I couldn't take that. I was scared to death of
that woman. When you came to A&M in 1968,
what was your assigned duty? I was to be a professor
of floriculture and have charge of the campus. I
was going to be the landscape architect on the, not
at the campus planning committee, but I ran into
Paul Stevens, which if any plan, a campus plan was
done, he was going to do it. He bucked me on
everything I tried to do all the way. It was bad. The
greatest accomplishment I did was in the
academics at his request, at Dr. Rodgers'
request. You see, horticulture, floriculture,
was a section of soil and crop sciences. And it had
been a flourishing department of agriculture
before the war. But things happened. The war
happened. It deteriorated a lot. And I was asked to
rebuild.
Let me get it back in focus.
I was called over to Dr. Bloodworth's office, he
was the head of the department, and said, they want
you to take over floriculture in the morning. And I
said, okay, but my Lord, Mr. DeWorth knew about it.
Do you remember DeWorth? Oh, Lord, that was a man.
He hated girls, first of all. He didn't like
students. And he would let some of them come in.
Well, anyway... I said, well, does DeWerth know
about that? He says, yes, he'll come over at 5. I
said, let me get out of here. So I went home. The next
morning, he came in, and he laid 50-some-odd keys
down on the desk without all the numbers and
identification taken off of them. He said, if
you're going to run this thing, you're going to
need the keys for it. So I called Bloodworth. I
said, I believe he called me. He says, how's it
going? I says, it's already started. I said, I've
got 50-some-odd keys laid down on my desk. All the
numbers and identifications have been filed off
of them. And he said, oh, I can take care of that real
quick. He picked up the phone and called physical,
and he said, were all the locks and keys changed on
every lock of the horticulture? Oh, well, bye. And
then I told the secretary that they're changing
all the locks on the . She says, no, I know who has the
key over here anyway. I said, that's right. I said,
I have been permitted to have a key in two years that
I've been here. And he wouldn't let me have a key,
would he? So as a result, he didn't get a key, and he
had to pay a deposit. And it just killed his soul. He
would not pay for a deposit on the keys, any of the
keys, because they were his greenhouses and all
that. And I had not been allowed in the greenhouses
for years, I mean, the times I'd been there.
Anyway, it came that everybody had to put up a
deposit and get the total security, and they had to
check them out and put their security up. Well,
that didn't go over too good, but anyway, it went
that way. We had control of the department, and we
got, apparently I did what they wanted done,
because they called me in January and said, now,
you've taken over Floriculture, we want you to
take over all of Horticulture. And I said, now
look, I'm the last man hired, low man on the totem
pole. I'm not a PhD. You have nine PhDs up there. But
I said, it's not an academic problem. It's a middle
management problem. You've got to tell people
what they're going to do and do it. So we redid all
the horticulture. We had 37 majors at Haskell at
the time I got over there. That's not enough to
teach any class. We had the practitioners
everywhere. Seven years later, I also was working
on the master planning committee and knew when the
buildings were coming. And between Perry
Atkinson and myself, we got $18 million for a new
horticulture building. Happened to be at the
right place at the right time again. And we
had 540 majors. That's actually that. So we went
from no department, or no section, not even a
viable section, to a full-fledged department of
horticulture, and a new building, and the buddy
Ben's request of $2 million. Again, I said I had to
be in the right place at the right time, and knew
what we had to do. And I didn't ask anybody. I would
come over there, and I said, I said, now, I'll do
this job. I know what you want done. But unless
those nine PhDs agree to it, I'm going to be the
chief paper shuffler. I don't want any part of it.
So all but one agreed. By the way, OK, except one.
And he wasn't going to agree. So they said, you
either agree to let Rutgers do the paperwork, or
you look for a new job. So he stayed. I didn't work as
hard in my life on anything as I did that. And we got
the new building, we got Buddy Benz to grant, and
the endowed chair and floor culture. And again, I
said, had I not come back to the NM, we'd never heard
of Buddy Benz. But that's, again, being in the
right place at the right time, and moving, not just
sitting still, and moving out. Now, so as an
academic, you were the department head and
reported to the dean of agriculture. We became a
department. No. Oh. No, no. We built it from a very
small section of 37 majors to a complete
department. But they thought they had to have a PhD
to hit it. So they had a nationwide search. And we
got a man who had not been in the academic field
Since he graduated from
Clemson, I believe, 18 years before, had not been
in an academic environment. He did not know what
even was up in academics. And his main area of
interest was garlic. So did you. But anyway, to
make a long story short, we got a man whose interest
was in garlic. And he didn't know what to do. Dr.
Bloodworth, I mean, Dr.
myself and Dr. in food science, there were three of
us who were senior professors. And we told him we'd
do anything we wanted to do. We'd be glad to help him
do anything he wanted to do. And so he'd call us in,
and every time we'd make a recommendation, he'd do
the opposite. And every time he got his tail in a
crack. And I mean... We had the 540 majors, and we
lost 200 majors the first year he was there. I never
worked as hard in my life to get a department
rebuilt and going in my life. See, it didn't
degenerate the way it did, go down. But that's the
hardest work I did for the president. And it all
became, and you see, The first thing you knew, we
went over fish-positive girls. So Kunkel called
me down and says, what are you going to do with all
these girls? I said, we're going to teach them.
Well, what are you going to teach them? They don't
want to be biochemists. I said, no, no, they sure
don't, Dean. There's a whole other world out there
besides biochemistry, and we're going to explore
it. I said, we'll start off with fly arranging
first and get the buddy bins and books going. And
that's what we did. And I But I have never in my life
worked this hard to get a program re-established
and go in and I did that one. And then we got this man,
the garlic man, that finally they wouldn't even
give him an army. One day he says, can you stand on
your head? I said, stand on my head? Well, why would
I want to stand on my head? Well, it's good for you.
It makes you think. And so he just stood on his head.
And I thought, my god. It's the best man to go down in
the industry. And it stands on its head, we were
dead ducks. That's all there is to it. And that's
what happened. All right, now, in addition to the
academic task, you were the chief campus planter.
To whom did you report in that responsibility?
That's another story. They wanted me to take it
over as a part of ground maintenance, I mean a
physical plant. I said, no dice. I said, I can't go
through 15 people and ever get heard I either am in
charge of the campus or I'm not in charge of it. And
so I said, OK. And they put me in the end part of my
physical plan. But I had my own budget in Maine.
First thing I knew, we had no money. We didn't know.
I said, look, I can't go up to this anymore. I'm
sorry. I'm either running this thing or I'm not
running it. And I'm not going to be here running a
physical plan that knows not a damn thing about
what's going on outside space. He's concerned
with inside space. I expect he's equipped to
handle that, but he doesn't know anything about
outdoor space or how to handle it. That's what it's
all about. I didn't think it easy, but I worked hard
and got it done the way I wanted it done, but it was
hard. Now, to whom did you report? Tom Cherry? Tom
Cherry. Describe him as a leader, as an
administrator. Very good. Excellent.
You know, his brother, Bob, would have
represented us in the legislature. But Tom Cherry
was a gentleman and a scholar from way back. I had no
trouble with Tom. I would just lay the cards on the
table, and we'd go from there. And
it worked out for them. I think Tom Sherry was one of
the finest people I ever worked with. Did he give
you any directions, any boundaries? I'd ask him
for boundaries, and then I'd ask him, for
instance, Clyde Freeman sent me a word one time
that some student came to interview me about the
ice return on the football field. Well, part of it,
And I've never been to either request to give a
student an interview in my life. But his henchman,
I forget his name now, came over and closed the door
back of me and said, who gave you the privilege to
write a student a story about the AstroTurf? I
said, nobody gave me that thing. I said, that's
part of the outdoor space I'm taking care of. And I
gave him the story. He says, well, don't do it
anymore. I said, you're just crazy as hell. If they
want to stir, they're going to get one. And I said,
that's not the way I was raised, and that's not the
way academic freedom is. I said, don't you or your
boss know anything about academic freedom? He
didn't reply to that, but they never did like the
fact that I would take the leeway to do what I was
supposed to do. They wanted me to be under them, and
I refused to do it. That's the only way I got
anything accomplished. was to just do what I
thought I was doing and tell him if he didn't like
it, he could go to hell. Now, when you first came,
first arrived, did you have any clear direction?
Did Mr. Rutter tell you what he wanted done? Yes and
no. You see, Mr. DeWorth just gave Ms. Rutter hell.
If she wanted a flower, she couldn't have it. He
didn't go out where the rodents were going. And he
accused her of cutting these rodents off test
plots. It was just pure hell. And he thought he
could get away. And I didn't have to be told. I saw
it. After we got to many girls, it was over 4% to 5%
girls, he came in one day. And last year, he was
there. He was head of this. And I had such a bad year
in my life. Everything I did was wrong. Came in one
day and said, you're making a big mistake letting
all these girls in here. I said, I'm not letting any
girls in here. They're taxpayers' daughters, and
they're just welding the fires in May. We're not
supposed to tell taxpayers they can't send their
kids here. That's the last thing we're going to do.
Anyway, I had a real rough time, because
everything I did that year was wrong. But I just
didn't pay attention. I ignored him and he'd grow
on me. I had to. But now regarding Mr. Rudder, did
you have any direct interaction with him? Yes.
Let me think.
When I came down for an interview, I talked to him,
and he made me the offer of $20,000 a year and told me
that I'd have charge of the campus. and be a
professor of floriculture. And as each one grew, I
had to keep pace with them. But the only place I did,
I think the best thing I ever did academically was
rebuild horticulture into a viable department.
And I mean, it was a good one. But the first time that
Mr. Garlic showed up and stood on his head, The kids
dropped that thing like, of course, like nobody in
business. Now, to attract students, what did you
and your colleagues do to attract more majors?
We talked to everyone that came on campus. I said, I
don't ever want to see a door closed and some kid
timidly knocking on that door. Because the bottom
line is, when you don't have any students to teach,
you don't have a job around here. I said, students
are number one priority at this place. And I want
you to understand, now And I never want to see
another door closing and somebody timidly
knocking on it. The whole time I stood there. And I
had one kid that I had to have him try to make an
appointment. I said, no, you keep that door open.
If he goes up there and knocks on the door, you let
him in. And we opened the door and said, you're
welcome as you can be. And Roy just jumped.